[[!meta title="Binary Packages Available from Third Parties"]]
# Binary Packages Available from Third Parties #

While OpenAFS.org packages up binary releases of OpenAFS, third parties may also release their own binary packages of OpenAFS. This page is an attempt to collect, in one place, various third party binary packages. Keep in mind that the packages would be supported by the third party and not openafs.org. However, you can still ask the OpenAFS community with questions about how and why things do or do not work.

### Fedora and CentOS7/RHEL7 ###

#### JSBillings Fedora Copr ####

Repackaged using sources from http://www.openafs.org/. Does not use the spec file included there, but a slimmer package that uses non-transarc paths.

Does not support Linux Kernel 4.5 or newer, as OpenAFS is not yet compatible with Linux Kernel 4.5 or newer.

* [OpenAFS](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/jsbillings/openafs/)
* [OpenAFS-KMod](https://copr.fedorainfracloud.org/coprs/jsbillings/openafs-kmod/)

### Mac OS X ###

Sine Nomine digitally signed 1.6.18 Installers for [10.10](http://download.sinenomine.net/openafs/bins/1.6.18/macos-10.10/) and [10.11](http://download.sinenomine.net/openafs/bins/1.6.18/macos-10.11/)

#### Release Notes for Sine Nomine Packages ####

   The disk images provided here provide support for recent Mac OS X
   versions, including provisional support for System Integrity Protection
   (aka "rootless") on 10.11.

   Included is an experimental change to the client to support the
   additional security verification of 10.11, where programs using the
   native "Cocoa" API will ask various root daemons (taskgated,
   DesktopServicesHelper, syspolicyd, possibly others depending on
   configuration) to verify files for them; these daemons do not have
   access to the user's token, and would normally fail verification as a
   result. This change means that root can read any AFS-resident file that
   is locally cached without a token. While this is technically a security
   violation, it should be noted that all versions of IBM AFS and OpenAFS
   already allow root (or, with lax cache permissions, potentially any
   user) to read any locally cached file by accessing the cache directory
   directly. Thus, the risk this introduces is no greater than the risks
   already carried by sites using AFS.

   Programs using the BSD APIs do not use the root daemons and work as
   expected, unless you run a signed binary from OpenAFS, in which case
   taskgated will attempt to verify the binary's signature and internal
   requirements and entitlements; this again requires the above root
   access change.

   On 10.11, client commands are installed to /opt/openafs/bin instead of
   /usr/bin. The system path database is modified to add this directory to
   the $PATH of new sessions. Running sessions after initial installation
   of the client will need to add /opt/openafs/bin to their $PATH
   manually.

The change to enable root to perform security checks appears to have
   introduced an occasional issue where tab completion in a directory will
   not work unless the directory's contents has previously been listed
   (e.g. with "ls"). While the security checks are only performed on
   10.11, the root access code path is active in all of the clients, so
   this will  also occur on 10.9 and 10.10. We are still working on
   diagnosing the cause, and will provide an updated release when it is
   available. In testing, this issue has proven uncommon and transient for
   most sites.

   NOTE: The preference pane remains deprecated in this version of the
   client. Sine Nomine is working on addressing problems in the preference
   pane for future versions.

