In this section we will add read-only volume support to our OpenAFS cell.

At this point we should have the top-level directory structure:

    /afs/                   -> root.afs
      yoyodyne.com/         -> root.cell
        project/
          mayhem            -> project.mayhem
        user/
          alice             -> user.alice
          bob               -> user.bob

== About volume groups ==

TODO: discussion about volume groups?

== Creating top level read-only volumes ==

Obtain admin credentials.

    kinit admin
    aklog

The <code>vos addsite</code> tool is used to declare read-only sites in
the VLDB. The first read-only site should match the location of the
read-only volume, i.e., the same fileserver and same partition on the
fileserver.  Additional read-only sites should be declared on other
fileservers.  Then, use <code>vos release</code> to distribute the files.

First, we create read-only volumes for the top level volumes.

    vos addsite afs01 a root.afs
    vos addsite afs02 a root.afs
    
    vos release root.afs
    
    vos addsite afs01 a root.cell
    vos addsite afs02 a root.cell
    
    vos release root.cell

Refresh your client's cache to be sure the paths are re-evaluated.

    fs checkvolumes
    fs flushall

Now, the cache manager should resolve paths to the top level cell directory to
be served out of the read-only root.cell volume.

    fs examine /afs/yoyodyne.com/

== Creating a read-only volume ==

Let's create read-only volumes for a volume in our cell.

    vos addsite afs01 a project.mayhem
    vos addsite afs02 a project.mayhem
    vos release project.mayhem

    fs examine /afs/yoyodyne.com/project/mayhem/

This path should now be served by the read-only copy of the volume.  The files
reside on both fileservers, and clients may use either one. If one file server
is down, clients should automatically fail over to the other server.

== Accessing read-write data ==

In order to access the read-write volume we must use a path that has
a read-write mount point.

    fs example /afs/.yoyodyne.com/project/mayhem/

Sine Nomine Associates Nov 2017
